---
layout: post
title: "Mercado La Paloma"
date: 2018-10-28
categories: "sustainability" 
author: "Elizabeth Winnicki"
lat: 34.017538
lng: -118.278401
runningtitle: "this is just the title at the top, no need to do anything here"
desc: "Irony of Economic Growth" 
---
Elizabeth Winnicki 
November 30, 2018
Winnicki-WP4


Irony of Economic Growth


While lively scenes of diversity, music, families, and great thinkers such as Caesar Chavez and Martin Luther King Jr. span the mural covering Mercado La Paloma Marketplace’s west wall, its University Park neighborhood does not reflect such idealizations. Rather, the relatively silent community stands still and filled with trash strewn across the parking lots and sidewalks, only to blow in the wind as cars zoom by and onto the highway leading to the nearby glitzy Downtown Los Angeles skyrises and luxuries. Communities in South Central Los Angeles, such as University Park, are largely shaped by economic growth and industrial boom. Although neighborhoods are gradually becoming racially diversified due to rising costs of living, many local South Central Los Angeles residents who are accustomed to neglect face challenges in sectors such as affordability and nutrition, which are influenced by industry and gentrification. Despite communities experiencing a shift in diversity, the rising costs in Los Angeles force citizens to move into undesirable neighborhoods that were previously comprised of a single ethnic and racial group. These neighborhoods (that were once neglected yet situated between the wealth of University of Southern California and Downtown Los Angeles), are carefully cleaned to welcome new residents. The gentrification promoted by the industrial boom generates jobs in the polycentric city’s neighborhoods but also forces essential community centers such as health clinics to close their doors. 
On the west wall of Mercado la Paloma Marketplace, the A Meeting of Minds mural includes scenes of diversity in which people of varying ages, eras, and ethnicities contribute to and participate in the University Park community. Throughout this mural, as seen in Figure 1, the ideas and dreams of a vibrant community are brought to life by scenes of vendors selling fresh produce, musicians playing instruments, children painting, and people walking among flowers while eating, talking, and enjoying themselves.




As stated by Elizabeth Eve King, the artist of A Meeting of Minds, the mural represents “Leonardo da Vinci to Sister Elizabeth…  to the young artists and babies in our community who are continuing to advance the philosophical ideals that create and foster a healthy, diverse, peaceful and beautiful community into the next millennium”. Great figures from the past, including Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, and Albert Einstein, along with young children and adults, are depicted to convey a sense of an integrated and thriving community full of ideas. Located in a historically underrepresented neighborhood, this colorful mural stands across the local Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV), where a variety of people of different ages enter and exit, and across a community park, where local kids of the neighborhood play football and basketball. 
Despite the mural’s grand vision of an integrated community in which people from diverse backgrounds gather in a creative outlet, the area is homogenously Latinx and the actual diversity in the community is not as extensive. In a 2008 study published by Los Angeles Times, the University Park population was 47.7% Latino and 7.0% Black, while more than 51% of the population held less than a high school degree (“Mapping South L.A.: Exposition Park,” 2008). Lacking higher formal education which is required of most jobs paying beyond minimum wage, many of the residents work mediocre employments that barely pay enough to sustain their families. As a result of University Park’s low incomes and staggeringly high density of people living in this area in comparison to the county, residents share similar backgrounds, ethnicity, socioeconomic standing, and customs. Mutual understanding between residents exists because they understand their own culture and values, including religion, fostering pride and identity which contribute to the ethnic uniformity of the community. Although A Meeting of the Minds captures scenes of a diverse neighborhood, Mercado La Paloma is still currently a predominantly low-income, homogenous area where many people continue to struggle with basic necessities such as shelter and food. 
In recent years, University Park has seen a shift in communities and people living in certain neighborhoods due to the rising rents across Los Angeles. People with money, who are mostly white, are drawn to formerly undesirable neighborhoods of color—locations where they would not want to have lived in before. For example, in the United States during 1970, 80% of blacks and 95% of non-Hispanic whites lived in neighborhoods with at least 50% of their co-ethics/racial, which is defined as people who are recognized as belonging to a main ethnic group (Ong et al., 2016). However, in 2014, 29% of blacks and 67% of whites lived in at least 50% co-ethnoracial majority tracts, indicating a large shift in diversity within communities. The changes in economy decrease housing affordability especially for current residents and increase crowding in neighborhoods. Although this situation fosters a gradually diverse community, the forced integration is uncomforting for both people who already live in the neighborhood and those who just move in. In an interview at Mercado Marketplace, a vendor who has lived in South Central Los Angeles throughout all his life acknowledged that “non-black people are moving into areas that are historically black. These are places they wouldn’t have wanted to be 10, 15, or 20 years ago. Now they have no place to go because real estate is so high in Los Angeles.” The increase in economy poses problems for current residents who want to stay in the community where they have lived for decades and even generations. Leaving the neighborhood would uproot their lives and distance themselves from people who share the same culture and heritage. Current residents in these neighborhoods are often minorities and forced to leave the area because rent is no longer affordable, distancing themselves from the people and community they grew up with. Additionally, “the current financial and housing crisis has particular relevance for Latinos and African Americans, given the concentration of subprime loans and foreclosures to minority borrowers and minority neighborhoods and their higher unemployment rates relative to whites” (McConnell, 2013). This difference is often due to the level of income that minorities, including Latinos and African Americans earn, as the types of jobs that they acquire are often due to their lack of formal education. With minimal wages, many families find it difficult to scrape together what they need to get by and pay the price of rent that their new neighbors can afford. Housing affordability problems are relevant particularly for low-income earners in Los Angeles County, as more than 60% of the population experiences housing-cost burden (McConnell, 2013). Families who are housing-cost burdened have less money to spend on food, health care, and insurance and pensions, which leads to health issues in the future and educational problems for children.  
Although many throughout University Park and surrounding neighborhoods encounter the dilemma of housing affordability, these families also face issues associated with rising costs of living. As rent increases, food prices also rise, and fast food becomes accessible and much cheaper than any available healthier options. People opt to eat at fast food restaurants such as McDonalds, Jack in the Box, and Chick-fil-A because they are relatively cheap and easy access, as Los Angeles lacks enough groceries stores and restaurants that carry healthy and nutritious produce and meals. These large chains serve food in greater portions with higher salt, saturated fats, and added sugar content. A study on food landscapes calculated the “retail food environment index’ in California counties and cities (23) and found that Los Angeles has more than 4 times as many fast food and convenience stores as supermarkets and produce vendors” (Azuma et al., 2010). In addition to the dearth of supermarkets and vendors which sell fresh and nutritious produce, this study found that racial and ethnic minorities are at an increasingly high risk for chronic diseases related to obesity, such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and atherosclerosis. When low-income families who are food insecure are challenged with the issue of housing to simply have a roof to live under, it is cheapest to eat nearby fast food which will sequester hunger. These families face further repercussions in the near future because their health has been neglected, as “food insecurity during childhood can lead to delayed development, diminished academic performance, impaired social skills and early onset of obesity” (Jyoti et al., 2005). The food that the children in these families eat due to its availability and affordability are high in calories and lack nutritional value. Without proper nutritional value, children are at a higher risk for delayed development and academic performance in addition to the physical consequences of diseases such as diabetes. The University Park neighborhood faces issues with housing affordability and food insecurity, which in turn is due to neglect throughout the community and a positional hierarchy based on social stratification.  
Although many people travel to and from Mercado La Paloma and nearby neighborhoods, signs of neglect are strikingly present, including the physical trash strewn across the streets, parking lots, and grassy areas beneath the highway. From Mercado Marketplace and the Metro Line Station to the Department of Motor Vehicles and community park, people are visiting and walking through this neighborhood constantly. However, abundant physical trash and the homeless population’s tents that line the sidewalk near the highway indicate the neglect that this community faces. Angel Luna, a resident of South Central Los Angeles, states that “we want things like… a new laundromat on the corner of Whittier and Boyle. We want our streets and sidewalks fixed…we shouldn’t have to wait until white people live here for someone to care enough to fix the sidewalks” (Dubb, 2017). All throughout Los Angeles, rent is rising as people are forced to move into neighborhoods that they would have never lived in during the past. When developers see that people from higher socioeconomic statuses are moving into neighborhoods, the streets are finally cleaned, sidewalks are fixed, and trash is cleared from the alleys. As seen in Figure 2, developers make it clear who they expect to attract by displaying specific ethnicities in promotional brochures, and many of those faces are not minorities. 










Although there is serious neglect in University Park through its physical infrastructure which in turns affects the livelihoods of the people in the area, large institutions such as University of Southern California and Downtown Los Angeles’ businesses contribute to this issue and often overlook neighborhoods that are deemed as unprofitable. An exception includes the USC Homeownership Program in which USC encourages employees to buy homes in the surrounding neighborhoods, incentivized by monthly payments totaling $50,000 or 20% of the home’s purchase price. This program began offering these subsidies in 1996 as an initiative to strengthen USC’s ties with surrounding communities and allow employees to purchase homes, live near work, and generate interest in their neighborhoods. Nonetheless, the greed and power of institutions often override the obvious need of restoration in neighborhoods like University Park. Poorer areas are more often seen as more unworthy to take care of because they would not bring in revenue and benefit the large institutions nearby. USC continues to expand as the newly built $700 million Village is a 15-acre addition which includes 15 restaurants, Trader Joe’s grocery store, Target, and a pharmacy, along with sprawling greenspace and trees. According to Herstik (2017), the new Village is an “ambitious test of a public-private partnership hoping to remake a historically underserved neighborhood… the project’s labor agreement also includes stipulations for preferential hiring of military veterans, the formerly incarcerated and “disadvantaged” workers, including minorities, people with disabilities and those with a history of homelessness.”
Although these ambitious goals seem beneficial because hundreds of jobs will open with the addition of new vendors and the Hogwarts-inspired dining hall, it is not as simple as just creating new employment for community members. USC’s student population is markedly wealthier than the citizens who live in surrounding neighborhoods. These areas have seen very little development throughout the years and have high rates of poverty. Residents who are not affiliated with USC know that there is a class distinction and may feel uncomfortable working in the Village to cater to a vast majority of these students who were born with more privilege than that which they have been born to. It could be easier for residents to just stick with the jobs they have now rather than be paid a comparable wage but potentially face unease in a new environment due to the large gap in socioeconomic standings. There is a social hierarchy present throughout the county based on race and socio-economic standing of residents, determining which neighborhoods are neglected and which are cleaned.
	Residential areas in Los Angeles are often inhabited by homogenous groups of people of a singular racial, ethnic, and documentation status, fueling the growing disparity between the rich and poor. An essential part of moving up the socioeconomic hierarchy includes living in desirable neighborhoods, which is similar to the processes of attaining more education, changing job statuses, and earning higher income. People of the similar backgrounds tend to stay within the same types of social networks throughout life, as they develop their own cultural ties and foster a mutual understanding between others in their group. Therefore, it is financially difficult for a family to simply move out of a neighborhood and assimilate into a better quality, clean neighborhood comprised of people of a different ethnic group, regardless of the ability to afford a higher rent. The paradox of mobility is that moving is encouraged for white people when they are financially capable of leaving to a desirable location because the appealing neighborhoods are already occupied by mostly white families, facilitating a relatively seamless transition. Minorities in Los Angeles, including Latinos and historically disadvantaged blacks occupy certain niches in South Central Los Angeles and these are the neglected neighborhoods that have fewer perks compared to white neighborhoods. Cort et al. (2014) found that “living in less desirable neighborhoods is a fate disproportionately borne by non-white Los Angeles residents and that in some limited ways, the penalty attached to being undocumented Latino might actually be greater than the penalty attached to being black.” Similar to the rest of the country, in Los Angeles, whites continue to occupy neighborhoods of best quality, followed by Asians, native-born Latinos, and foreign-born Latinos and blacks. The poverty rate of neighborhoods is often an appropriate measure of quality because poor neighborhoods lack the qualities and critical stabilizing characteristics that make white neighborhoods desirable, such as low crime-rates, better educational access, access to activities, family friendliness, and proximity to public transportation. Additionally, “income-based dissimilarity is considerably lower than for observed residential segregation, hence suggesting that income differences are only a small fraction in generating ethnoracial residential segregation and that segregation is largely driven by ethnic/racial differences” (Ong et al., 2016). While economic differences in neighborhoods impact where families live and thus accessibility to better education, food, recreational activities, racial segregation, Ong et al. (2016) found that other factors such as race heavily impacts residential segregation. Segregation between blacks and whites has been slowly decreasing but still remains high and even increasing among Hispanics and whites. As a result, these differences can be visibly seen in different neighborhoods, as three quarters of the Los Angeles County census tracts have an ethnic and racial minority with non-Hispanics as the most segregated population. After simulating dissimilarity indices based on income in which the neighborhood and income of residents were accounted for, Ong et al. (2016) found a large gap in residential segregation compared to what neighborhoods are predicted to look like based on income. Racial preference and institutional racism contribute to the residential segregation found in Los Angeles and throughout the country. An individual’s neighborhood is an important factor for livelihood because it determines the type of employment and proximity of jobs realistically attainable and available.
With the industrial economic boom in Los Angeles, a plethora of jobs are opening downtown in the business district, as well as jobs in neighborhoods with primarily blue-collared and pink-collared work in fast food restaurants and sales. The proximity of employment often determines which jobs an individual has access to. However, in University Park and many of neighborhoods of South Central Los Angeles, majority of these jobs do not pay well, require long hours, and are unpleasant. These employments, such as fast food restaurant cashier or dishwasher, are the types of work available to and attainable for people who live in this area because they are easily accessible and do not require significant levels of formal education. A study found that in Los Angeles, “a polycentric model of the employment distribution plausibly accounts for all the jobs in the metropolitan area, whereas the monocentric model generates a metropolitan labor market that is much too large spatially, extending almost all the way to the Arizona border” (Gordon, 1986). The geographical distribution of employment combines job clustering around a few major employment centers, such as downtown Los Angeles and Beverly Hills. However, there is a much larger number of population subcenters areas in community niches such as University Park. In Los Angeles, polycentricism has been associated with shorter work trips because as the area of city becomes larger, commuting trips shorten in polycentric cities as opposed to lengthen as in monocentric cities. Although polycentricism leads to an increasing number of accessible jobs available in closer locations, employment in neighborhoods that are already of poor quality, are confined to jobs that have long hours and no benefits. Wachs and Kumagai (1973) found “accessibility to the economic, recreational, service, and social opportunities within a region is an important component of the quality of life within the region. It is also an element of the quality of life which is repeatedly modified by public policy-making related to the public and private transportation system, and the locations of economic and public service activities.” Although the industrial boom Los Angeles establishes more jobs and benefits those in social classes who can get hired in areas such as Downtown Los Angeles, often the new jobs in disadvantaged neighborhoods are unwanted and pay minimally, leaving families with little to hope for. The industrial boom in Los Angeles is tied to the gentrification of neighborhoods that forces businesses and practices to close down. 
The gentrification of Los Angeles disrupts communities because businesses and centers that residents depend upon close in order to make room for new housing. Health clinics and family-run businesses integral to the identity of communities are forced to shut down and residents are left to find these essential needs elsewhere. In University Park, the company Champion Development plans to build a 99-unit townhouse project on a 2.75 acre site on which the John Tracy Clinic stands. According to Barragan (2018), “the clinic, which provides services to children with hearing loss and their parents, is planning to stay in the community but will move to a “a newer, better equipped facility.” It will contribute to lease the property from Champion while the townhouse project goes through the approval process.” It is expected that the demand for this rental project will come from USC faculty and employees due to the decrease in housing availability and rising rent. Although there are prospects for an affordable housing component to the project, it is unclear how many units will take up that section of the development. Families and residents in this community may not even be able to afford the proposed rent and compare with USC faculty and employees.  
Additionally, there are social factors that must be taken in consideration, as current residents may feel uncomfortable moving into predominantly USC-occupied housing. Although the hearing clinic plans to move to a newer facility within the community, these types of changes could take years. This is an additional burden on families because they have to invest more time looking for a new clinic possibly in an unfamiliar neighborhood, and visit a practitioner who they are unfamiliar with. Although there are benefits to gentrification in which new jobs are created, these jobs do not pay well and people have to work long hours. Community centers that people depend on, such as the John Tracy Clinic, are forced to close their doors, affecting families who rely on basic health care and services of the centers.
As rent increases along with the affordability to live in a city such as Los Angeles, citizens are forced to move into undesirable neighborhoods, such as University Park, that were once occupied by people of a singular racial and ethnic background. Poorer neighborhoods in areas are untended as companies seek to beautify areas where wealthier residents move into and inhabit. Along with industrialization comes gentrification that produces new jobs within lower income neighborhoods. However, these are undesirable employments with long hours and low wages which in the long run do not satisfy the needs of the community. Despite these shortcomings of the polycentric city of Los Angeles, the Mercado La Paloma A Meeting of Minds mural stands to remind people of the goals of the community and hope for positive change.






Works Cited


Azuma, A.M., Gilliland, S., Vallianatos, M., Gottlieb, R. (2010). Food access, availability, and affordability in 3 Los Angeles communities. Preventing Chronic Disease. http://www.cdc. gov/pcd/issues/2010/mar/08_0232.htm 

Barragan, B. (2018). First look at for-rent townhouses that will rise near USC. Retrieved from https://la.curbed.com/2018/6/4/17333660/usc-university-park-townhouse-project-john-tracy-clinic

Cort, D. A., Lin, K., & Stevenson, G. (2014). Residential hierarchy in Los Angeles: An examination of ethnic and documentation status differences. Social Science Research, 45, 170-183. doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2013.12.013

Dubb, S. (2017). Gentrification Hits Historic Los Angeles Neighborhoods. Retrieved from https://nonprofitquarterly.org/2017/11/07/gentrification-hits-historic-los-angeles-neighborhoods/

Gordon, P., Richardson, H. W., & Wong, H. L. (1986). The Distribution of Population and Employment in a Polycentric City: The Case of Los Angeles. Environment and Planning A, 18(2), 161-173. doi:10.1068/a180161

Herstik, L. (2017, August 15). U.S.C. Expands in a 'Neglected' Neighborhood, Promising Jobs and More. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/15/realestate/commercial/usc-village-los-angeles-campus.html

Jyoti, D. F., Frongillo, E. A., & Jones, S. J. (2005). Food Insecurity Affects School Childrens Academic Performance, Weight Gain, and Social Skills. The Journal of Nutrition, 135(12), 2831-2839. doi:10.1093/jn/135.12.2831

King, E. E. (n.d.). A Meeting of Minds. Retrieved from http://www.elizabetheveking.com/mural---meetings-of-minds.html

Mapping South L.A.: Exposition Park (2008). Retrieved from http://maps.latimes.com/neighborhoods/neighborhood/exposition-park/

McConnell, E. D. (2013). Who has Housing Affordability Problems? Disparities in Housing Cost Burden by Race, Nativity, and Legal Status in Los Angeles. Race and Social Problems, 5(3), 173-190. doi:10.1007/s12552-013-9086-x

Ong, P., Pech, C., Chhea, J., Lee, C.A. (2016). Race, Ethnicity, and Income Segregation in Los Angeles. UCLA Center for Neighborhood Knowledge. 

Wachs, M., & Kumagai, T. (1973). Physical accessibility as a social indicator. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 7(5), 437-456. doi:10.1016/0038-0121(73)90041-4


